symmetrySS
Article
Face Image Age Estimation Based on Data
Augmentation and Lightweight Convolutional
Neural Network
Xinhua Liu1,2,*
, Yao Zou1,2,*, Hailan Kuang1,2and Xiaolin Ma1,2
1School of Information Engineering, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430070, China;
kuanghailan@whut.edu.cn (H.K.); maxiaolin0615@whut.edu.cn (X.M.)
2Key Laboratory of Fiber Optic Sensing Technology and Information Processing, Wuhan University of
Technology, Ministry of Education, Wuhan 430070, China
*Correspondence: liuxinhua@whut.edu.cn (X.L.); zouyao@whut.edu.cn (Y.Z.)
Received: 14 December 2019; Accepted: 9 January 2020; Published: 10 January 2020
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: Face images contain many important biological characteristics. The research directions of
face images mainly include face age estimation, gender judgment, and facial expression recognition.
Taking face age estimation as an example, the estimation of face age images through algorithms
can be widely used in the ﬁelds of biometrics, intelligent monitoring, human-computer interaction,
and personalized services. With the rapid development of computer technology, the processing speed
of electronic devices has greatly increased, and the storage capacity has been greatly increased, allowing
deep learning to dominate the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence. Traditional age estimation methods ﬁrst
design features manually, then extract features, and perform age estimation. Convolutional neural
networks (CNN) in deep learning have incomparable advantages in processing image features.
Practice has proven that the accuracy of using convolutional neural networks to estimate the age of
face images is far superior to traditional methods. However, as neural networks are designed to be
deeper, and networks are becoming larger and more complex, this makes it di cult to deploy models
on mobile terminals. Based on a lightweight convolutional neural network, an improved Shu eNetV2
network based on the mixed attention mechanism (MA-SFV2: Mixed Attention-Shu eNetV2) is
proposed in this paper by transforming the output layer, merging classiﬁcation and regression
age estimation methods, and highlighting important features by preprocessing images and data
augmentation methods. The inﬂuence of noise vectors such as the environmental information
unrelated to faces in the image is reduced, so that the ﬁnal age estimation accuracy can be comparable
to the state-of-the-art.
Keywords: CNN; age estimation; data augmentation; classiﬁcation; regression
1. Introduction
Among the various biometric recognition technologies, face recognition is a biometric recognition
technology with great development potential, and has broad application prospects in information
security, public safety, and other ﬁelds. In academia, research topics related to classical face analysis
usually include face detection [ 1], face recognition [ 2], face veriﬁcation [ 3], face tracking [ 4], 3D facial
expression recognition [ 5,6], etc. Among them, the analysis of face attributes such as age estimation,
gender recognition, and ethnic recognition has attracted the interest of many researchers [7].
The face aging process generally follows some common aging modes. During the growth stage of
children, the biggest change is the shape change caused by the growth of the skull. The aging process
in adulthood is mainly reﬂected in changes in facial skin texture such as the appearance and deepening
of wrinkles, loose skin, increased spots [ 8–10], etc. However, due to the complex facial features and
Symmetry 2020 ,12, 146; doi:10.3390 /sym12010146 www.mdpi.com /journal /symmetry Symmetry 2020 ,12, 146 2 of 17
slow aging process, the degree of aging depends not only on the increase in age, but also due to various
factors such as gender, race, genes, living habits, and health status [ 11]. In addition, the collection
of face age images is very burdensome. The existing public face age datasets have many problems
such as an imbalance in age, gender, and ethnicity, which makes it di cult to meet the requirements
of most research work. The above reasons mean that the research on face age estimation still faces
great challenges. Although facing huge challenges, face age estimation technology has a wide range of
potential applications in the ﬁelds of surveillance and investigation, information management systems,
intelligent human–computer interaction, social entertainment, and other ﬁelds.
The face age estimation process roughly includes image preprocessing, feature extraction, and age
estimation. Image pre-processing methods include human face detection, face correction, and image
cropping. Before neural network training in deep learning methods, image augmentation methods can
be used to augment the dataset to alleviate the overﬁtting of the network. Image augmentation methods
include ﬁltering, sharpening, histogram enhancement, ﬂipping, rotation, and scale transformation.
In the feature extraction stage, traditional methods mostly use explicit feature extraction to obtain
age features based on manual design [ 12,13]. Due to the limitations of hand-designed features,
the extracted age features are not necessarily optimal. The modern feature extraction method based
on convolutional neural networks can well capture the face-related feature information in the image,
and has a strong robust adaptability to the noise in the image, which means the ﬁnal estimation in
the age estimation stage is more accurate. In the age estimation stage, there are roughly classiﬁcation,
regression, blending, and distributed learning methods. If age is regarded as a separate label, then age
estimation is a classiﬁcation problem. In addition, the age of the human face has a certain order, so that
the age estimation can also be regarded as a regression problem. Some people have suggested that the
facial features of adjacent ages have similarities. If the age correlation between adjacent ages is fully
considered, the age estimation can be regarded as a distribution learning problem, so that multi-label
learning or distribution learning can be used in the training of neural networks. Then, neighboring age
tag information contributes to real age tags during the network training phase.
However, current convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are becoming larger and more complex,
exposing many shortcomings such as too many model parameters, large footprints, large training
dataset, long training time, and inconvenient deployment on mobile terminals. Therefore, a more
lightweight network is needed, but at the same time, the accuracy of age estimation must be guaranteed.
Aiming at the above problems, this paper proposes an age estimation model based on Shu eNetV2.
Experiments show that the network proposed in this paper converges quickly during the training
phase, has high accuracy during the age estimation phase, and has a small footprint of the network
model. The contributions of this article are summarized as follows:
(1) A lightweight convolutional neural network age estimation model based on the mixed attention
mechanism is constructed.
(2) The age estimation method combining classiﬁcation and regression is easy to implement and the
ﬁnal age estimation accuracy is very high.
(3) Perform face detection and correction on the input face image, and perform image augmentation,
so that the feature information related to the face age is ampliﬁed, which is helpful for
network learning.
2. Related Work
2.1. Feature Extraction
At the feature extraction stage, Kwon et al. [ 12] ﬁrst used anthropometric models to extract
facial age features, and based on craniofacial development theory and skin wrinkle features, roughly
divided ages into three categories: infants, youth, and elderly. Lanitis et al. [ 13] ﬁrst applied Active
Appearance Model (AAM) to the study of face age estimation. Based on AAM features, a quadratic
regression function was used for age estimation. Geng et al. [ 11] proposed a concept of aging patterns Symmetry 2020 ,12, 146 3 of 17
subspace (AGES). Guo et al. [ 14] introduced manifold learning into the age estimation of face images,
and mapped high-dimensional face datasets to low-dimensional manifolds, that is, transforming face
images into a low-dimensional age feature. The method based on manifold learning greatly relaxes the
requirements for training data. Gunay et al. [ 15] applied local binary pattern (LBP) to age estimation,
and achieved relatively good results. Since then, many improved face age estimation methods based
on LBP have appeared. Guo et al. [ 16] also proposed a bio-inspired feature (BIF), which has attracted
the attention of many domestic and foreign scholars on age estimation due to better experimental
results. In recent years, deep learning technologies such as CNN have been gradually applied to
age estimation, and have achieved better results than manually designed features. Dong et al. [ 17]
used CNN in age estimation for the ﬁrst time and designed a fully learned end-to-end age estimation
system. This method introduces the multi-scale analysis strategy of traditional methods into CNN,
which signiﬁcantly improves the performance, but the CNN structure is very shallow. Wang et al. [ 18]
applied CNN to the extraction of facial age features. Unlike the explicit feature extraction of traditional
methods, the implicit features learned by CNN avoid the limitations brought by hand-designed
features. However, in the research work of [ 18], CNN is only used for feature extraction, and then it is
input into a separate classiﬁcation or regression model for age estimation. Niu et al. [ 19] implemented
an end-to-end learning method that uses deep convolutional neural networks to perform feature
learning and regression modeling simultaneously. The absolute mean age error of the model on the
MORPH2 and AFAD datasets was 3.27 0.02 and 3.340.08, respectively. Chen et al. [ 20] proposed
a CNN-based age estimation network framework (ranking-CNN), which includes a series of basic
CNN networks, each of which trains a label. Liu et al. [ 21] proposed a new face age estimation feature
learning method-ordered deep feature learning. Gao et al. [ 22] regarded the age label as a multi-label
problem and proposed deep label distribution learning. Kang et al. [ 23] used deep residual CNN to
solve the problem of robustness of age estimation, but the accuracy of age estimation was not high.
Jeong et al. [ 24] used a multi-task Siamese network to improve the accuracy of age estimation, but the
network has a large structure and a bloated model.
The CNN networks above-mentioned in terms of age feature extraction are basically heavyweight
networks such as VGG-16 and ResNet. With the development of lightweight networks in recent
years, Mobilenetv2 [ 25], Shu eNetV2 [ 26], SSR-NET [ 27] and other networks have greatly accelerated
the deployment process of neural network models in mobile terminals. Although these lightweight
networks have much fewer parameters than heavyweight networks, their feature extraction capabilities
are very strong, and the network training time is not long.
In addition, in order to better extract the image feature information, the necessary data
preprocessing is required before feature extraction. This paper used dlib [ 28] to ﬁrst perform face
detection, then performed rotation correction based on the relative positions of the eyes based on
the feature points, and then cropped to remove unwanted information such as the environmental
information, leaving only important information related to the face. In order to expand the training
dataset and alleviate the overﬁtting phenomenon of the neural network during the training process,
image augmentation on the training dataset can achieve good results. The speciﬁc method is to rotate,
ﬂip, and add noise to the images according to a certain probability during the training process.
2.2. Age Estimation
Age estimation methods include classiﬁcation, regression, ranking, and combination. These age
estimation methods can be used in conjunction with various feature extraction methods to complete
the age estimation task. Many excellent methods have appeared in recent years.
Hu et al. [ 29] used the method of Uniform Local Binary Patterns (ULBP) +Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) +Support Vector Machine (SVM) for age estimation. Guo et al. [ 30] proposed a locally
adjusted robust regression (LARR) algorithm, which combines SVM and Support Vector Regression
(SVR) when estimating age by ﬁrst using SVR to estimate a global age range, and then using SVM
to perform exact age estimation. Chao et al. [ 31] better understood the relationship between facial Symmetry 2020 ,12, 146 4 of 17
features and age through metric learning and dimensionality reduction processing, and proposed
an age-oriented local regression method for the age estimation of complex facial aging processes.
Rothe et al. [ 32] used the deep expectation method to estimate the age. First, the Softmax operation
was used to calculate the probability of each age category at the output layer of the network, and then
the expected value was calculated as the estimated age. This method was the champion of the apparent
age estimation competition in 2015. Its main contribution is to publish IMDB-WIKI dataset (images of
celebrities from IMDb and Wikipedia), the largest database of face age and gender estimates to date
(although there are many errors in it, such as not being human images). Chang et al. [ 33] proposed
an ordinal hyperplane sorting algorithm OHRank, which estimates the age of humans through face
images. The design of the algorithm is based on the relative order information between the age tags in
the database. Human age is inferred by aggregating a set of preferences and their cost sensitivity from
an ordered hyperplane.
The age estimation method used in this paper is a hybrid method of classiﬁcation and regression.
Considering age as independent multiple categories, then age estimation is a classiﬁcation problem,
a fully-connected layer of the neural network was constructed with a classiﬁcation layer containing
101 neurons (representing the face 0–100 years old). In this way, the estimated age value can be
calculated according to the method in [ 32], and the classiﬁcation loss is used as part of the joint loss
function. If you consider that age change is a continuous process, you can also consider the age
estimation problem as a regression problem. This paper added a regression layer with only one neuron
behind the classiﬁcation layer, and calculated the absolute deviation of the estimated age from the real
age as the regression loss and the previous classiﬁcation loss constitute a loss function in the neural
network training process of this paper.
3. Proposed Method
3.1. Architecture
The overall block diagram of our face age estimation system is shown in Figure 1. As can be
seen from the ﬁgure, the original picture may be subjected to image augmentation operations before
entering the neural network. There will be multiple sets of comparative experiments to compare
and analyze the e ectiveness of this image augmentation operation. The architecture of the neural
network is based on the Shu eNetV2 network, but the last output layer of the original Shu eNetV2
has 1000 neurons. We ﬁrst transformed it into 101 neurons, and then added an output with only one
neuron behind this layer.
Symmetry 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 18 
 age-oriented local regression method for the age esti mation of complex facial aging processes. Rothe et 
al. [32] used the deep expectation method to estima te the age. First, the Softmax operation was used 
to calculate the probability of each age category at the output layer of the network, and then the 
expected value was calculated as the estimated age.  This method was the champion of the apparent 
age estimation competition in 2015. Its main contribution is to publish IMDB-WIKI dataset (images of celebrities from IMDb and Wikipedia), the larges t database of face age and gender estimates to 
date (although there are many errors in it, such  as not being human images). Chang et al. [33] 
proposed an ordinal hyperplane sorting algori thm OHRank, which estimates the age of humans 
through face images. The design of the algorithm is  based on the relative order information between 
the age tags in the database. Human age is inferred by aggregating a set of preferences and their cost 
sensitivity from an ordered hyperplane. 
The age estimation method used in this paper is a hybrid method of classification and regression. 
Considering age as independent multiple categories, then age estimation is a classification problem, 
a fully-connected layer of the neural network was constructed with  a classification layer containing 
101 neurons (representing the face 0–100 years old) . In this way, the estimated age value can be 
calculated according to the method in [32], and the classification loss is used as part of the joint loss 
function. If you consider that age change is a co ntinuous process, you can also consider the age 
estimation problem as a regression problem. This pa per added a regression layer with only one neuron 
behind the classification layer, and calculated the ab solute deviation of the estimated age from the real 
age as the regression loss and the previous classifica tion loss constitute a loss function in the neural 
network training process of this paper. 
3. Proposed Method 3.1. Architecture 
The overall block diagram of our fa ce age estimation system is shown in Figure 1. As can be seen 
from the figure, the original picture may be subj ected to image augmentation operations before 
entering the neural network. There will be multiple sets of comparative experiments to compare and analyze the effectiveness of this image augmentati on operation. The architecture of the neural 
network is based on the ShuffleNetV2 network, but th e last output layer of the original ShuffleNetV2 
has 1000 neurons. We first transformed it into 101 ne urons, and then added an  output with only one 
neuron behind this layer. 
 
Figure 1. The framework of our method. 
The focus of attention in computer vision is to let the system learn to focus on the places of interest. 
A neural network with an attention mechanism ca n, on one hand, learn the attention mechanism 
autonomously; on the other hand, the attention mech anism can in turn help us understand the world 
seen by the neural network. 
In order to improve the feature extraction capab ility of the ShuffleNetV2 network, we also added 
a hybrid attention mechanism and a residual modu le. The attention mechanis m originates from the 
study of human vision. In cognitive science, due to  the bottleneck of information processing, humans 
selectively focus on a part of all information while ignoring other visible info rmation. Later experiments 
proved that this operation can effectively impr ove the accuracy of the final age estimation. 
Figure 1. The framework of our method.
The focus of attention in computer vision is to let the system learn to focus on the places of interest.
A neural network with an attention mechanism can, on one hand, learn the attention mechanism
autonomously; on the other hand, the attention mechanism can in turn help us understand the world
seen by the neural network.
In order to improve the feature extraction capability of the Shu eNetV2 network, we also added
a hybrid attention mechanism and a residual module. The attention mechanism originates from the
study of human vision. In cognitive science, due to the bottleneck of information processing, humans
selectively focus on a part of all information while ignoring other visible information. Later experiments
proved that this operation can e ectively improve the accuracy of the ﬁnal age estimation. Symmetry 2020 ,12, 146 5 of 17
3.2. Mixed Attention-Shu eNetV2
ShueNetV2 is a lightweight convolutional neural network proposed by Ma et al. in 2018.
It has advantages over networks such as Mobilenetv2 in terms of training time and feature extraction
capabilities. The layers of the Shu eNetV2 network are shown in Table 1. As the last layer of the
original sfv2 network is a fully connected layer containing 1000 neurons, we made corresponding
modiﬁcations based on the age estimation task. Speciﬁcally, ﬁrst, the number of neurons in the last
layer was changed to 101, and then a regression layer with only one neuron was added behind it.
Table 1. The overall architecture of Shu eNetV2.
Layer Output Size KSize Stride Repeat Output Channels
Image 224 224 3
Conv1 MaxPool 112 112 33 2 1 24
Stage2 28 28 1 3 244
Stage3 14 14 1 7 488
Stage4 7 7 1 3 976
Conv5 7 7 11 2048
GlobalPool 1 1 77
FC 101
LastFC 1
The number of output channels of each Shu e layer can be scaled. The last column of the table is
the number of output channels of the Shu e layer. Originally, there are various combinations, for
example, 0.5 times, 1 time, 1.5 times, and 2 times. The corresponding output channels are [24, 48, 96,
192, 1024], [24, 116, 232, 464, 1024], [24, 176, 352, 704, 1024], and [24, 244, 488, 976, 2048]. [24, 244, 488,
976, 2048] is the 2x mode used in this paper to obtain stronger feature extraction capabilities. Very,
very deep neural networks are di cult to train because there are gradient disappearance and gradient
explosion problems, but then adding the residual network can alleviate this problem. The structure of
this paper’s convolutional neural network based on Shu eNetV2 is shown in Figure 2.
Symmetry 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 18 
 3.2. Mixed Attention-ShuffleNetV2 
ShuffleNetV2 is a lightweight convolutional neural network proposed by Ma et al. in 2018. It has 
advantages over networks such as Mobilenetv2 in terms of training time and feature extraction 
capabilities. The layers of the ShuffleNetV2 networ k are shown in Table 1. As the last layer of the 
original sfv2 network is a fully connected laye r containing 1000 neurons, we made corresponding 
modifications based on the age estimation task. Specifically, first, the number of neurons in the last layer was changed to 101, and then a regression laye r with only one neuron was added behind it. 
Table 1. The overall architecture of ShuffleNetV2. 
Layer Output Size KSize Stride Repeat Output Channels 
Image 224 × 224    3 
Conv1 MaxPool 112 × 112 3 × 3 2 1 24 
Stage2 28 × 28  1 3 244 
Stage3 14 × 14  1 7 488 
Stage4 7 × 7  1 3 976 
Conv5 7 × 7 1 × 1   2048 
GlobalPool 1 × 1 7 × 7    
FC     101 
LastFC     1 
The number of output channels of each Shuffle la yer can be scaled. The last column of the table 
is the number of output channels of the Shuffle layer. Originally, there are various combinations, for example, 0.5 times, 1 time, 1.5 times, and 2 times. The corresponding output channels are [24, 48, 96, 
192, 1024], [24,116, 232, 464, 1024], [24, 176, 352, 704, 1024], and [24, 244, 488, 976, 2048]. [24, 244, 488, 
976, 2048] is the 2x mode used in this paper to obta in stronger feature extracti on capabilities. Very, very 
deep neural networks are difficult to train beca use there are gradient disappearance and gradient 
explosion problems, but then adding the residual ne twork can alleviate this problem. The structure of 
this paper’s convolutional neural network base d on ShuffleNetV2 is shown in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. The composition of our Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) based on ShuffleNetV2. 
T h e  b a s i c  u n i t  o f  S h u f f l e N e t V 2  i s  s h o w n  i n  F i g u r e  3 .  I t  c a n  b e  s e e n  t h a t  [ 1 4 ]  d e s i g n e d  a n  
operation called channel splitting. 
Figure 2. The composition of our Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) based on Shu eNetV2. Symmetry 2020 ,12, 146 6 of 17
The basic unit of Shu eNetV2 is shown in Figure 3. It can be seen that [ 14] designed an operation
called channel splitting.
Symmetry 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 18 
 At the beginning of each unit, the input channels  are split into two branches, where one branch 
is used for identity mapping and the other branch passes three convolutional layers while ensuring 
that the number of output channels is the same as  the number of input channels. After convolution, 
the two branches are spliced with the same number  of channels. The subseq uent channel cleaning 
operation enhances the information exchange between the two branches. 
In recent years, the topic about attention mechanism has been very  hot. Introducing the attention 
mechanism into the neural network can enlarge the ar ea of interest in the image or assign different 
weights to multiple channels of the feature ma p. These can enhance the convolutional neural 
network. The feature extraction ability improves th e accuracy of the final age estimation. Hu et al. 
[34] proposed Squeeze-and-Excita tion networks (SENet), which is  a channel attention mechanism. 
Woo et al. [35] proposed a convolution block a ttention module (CBAM). The convolution module 
attention mechanism is mainly composed of the channel attention module and the spatial attention module. The channel attention mechanism in CBAM is more complicated than SENet and the calculation operations are greater. For the spatial attention mechanism, we used CBAM’s spatial attention module. We will introduce related attentio n modules below, and then introduce this mixed 
attention mechanism into the basic unit of Shuf fleNetV2. Specifically, the output of the 1 × 1 
convolution layer is passed throug h a channel attention module, an d then goes through a spatial 
attention module and a residual module before the concatenation operation. 
 
Figure 3. The basic unit of ShuffleNetV2. ( a) The basic unit of original ShuffleNetV2. ( b) The basic 
unit of our ShuffleNetV2 with mixed attention mechanism added. 
The channel attention module is shown in Figure 4. This module is mainly composed of the 
Squeeze operation and Excitation operation. Given an input 𝑥, the number of feature channels is 𝑐ଵ. 
After a series of general transformations such as convolution, a feature with the number of feature 
channels 𝑐ଶ is obtained. Unlike the traditional CNN, the next step is to re-calibrate the features 
obtained by three operations. The first is the Sq ueeze operation. We performed feature compression 
along the spatial dimension, turning each two-dimensional feature channel into a real number. This real number has a global receptiv e field to some extent, and the dimensions of the output match the 
number of feature channels of the input. The second is the Excitation operation, which is a mechanism similar to a gate in a recurrent neural network. Weights are genera ted for each feature channel by a 
parameter 𝑤, where the parameter 𝑤 is learned to explicitly model the correlation between feature 
channels. The last is the Reweight operation. The weight of the output  of Excitation is regarded as 
the importance of each feature channel after feature se lection, and then it is weighted to the previous 
Figure 3. The basic unit of Shu eNetV2. ( a) The basic unit of original Shu eNetV2. ( b) The basic unit
of our Shu eNetV2 with mixed attention mechanism added.
At the beginning of each unit, the input channels are split into two branches, where one branch
is used for identity mapping and the other branch passes three convolutional layers while ensuring
that the number of output channels is the same as the number of input channels. After convolution,
the two branches are spliced with the same number of channels. The subsequent channel cleaning
operation enhances the information exchange between the two branches.
In recent years, the topic about attention mechanism has been very hot. Introducing the attention
mechanism into the neural network can enlarge the area of interest in the image or assign di erent
weights to multiple channels of the feature map. These can enhance the convolutional neural network.
The feature extraction ability improves the accuracy of the ﬁnal age estimation. Hu et al. [ 34] proposed
Squeeze-and-Excitation networks (SENet), which is a channel attention mechanism. Woo et al. [ 35]
proposed a convolution block attention module (CBAM). The convolution module attention mechanism
is mainly composed of the channel attention module and the spatial attention module. The channel
attention mechanism in CBAM is more complicated than SENet and the calculation operations are
greater. For the spatial attention mechanism, we used CBAM’s spatial attention module. We will
introduce related attention modules below, and then introduce this mixed attention mechanism into
the basic unit of Shu eNetV2. Speciﬁcally, the output of the 1 1 convolution layer is passed through
a channel attention module, and then goes through a spatial attention module and a residual module
before the concatenation operation.
The channel attention module is shown in Figure 4. This module is mainly composed of the
Squeeze operation and Excitation operation. Given an input x, the number of feature channels is c1.
After a series of general transformations such as convolution, a feature with the number of feature
channels c2is obtained. Unlike the traditional CNN, the next step is to re-calibrate the features obtained
by three operations. The ﬁrst is the Squeeze operation. We performed feature compression along the
spatial dimension, turning each two-dimensional feature channel into a real number. This real number
has a global receptive ﬁeld to some extent, and the dimensions of the output match the number of
feature channels of the input. The second is the Excitation operation, which is a mechanism similar to
a gate in a recurrent neural network. Weights are generated for each feature channel by a parameter w,
where the parameter wis learned to explicitly model the correlation between feature channels. The last Symmetry 2020 ,12, 146 7 of 17
is the Reweight operation. The weight of the output of Excitation is regarded as the importance of
each feature channel after feature selection, and then it is weighted to the previous features channel
by channel by multiplication to complete the recalibration of the original features in the channel
dimension. The diagram of channel attention module is shown in Figure 4.
Symmetry 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 18 
 features channel by channel by multiplication to complete the recalibration of the original features in 
the channel dimension. The diagram of channe l attention module is shown in Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4. Diagram of the channel attention module. 
The 𝐹௧௥ operation is a standard convolut ion operation. Strictly speaking, it does not belong to SENet. 
The definition of its input and output is expressed as follows: ×× × ×→∈ ∈ '' '
tr:, ,HWC H W CFX U X U  Then 
this 𝐹௧௥ convolution operation is shown in Equation (1) where 𝑣௖ represents the c-th convolution kernel 
and 𝑥௦ represents the s-th input. 
==∗ = ∗'
cc
1C
ss
c
suv X v x  (1) 
The 𝑈 obtained by 𝐹௧௥ is the second three-dimensional matrix on the left in Figure 4, also called 
𝐶, feature maps with the size 𝐻×𝑊 . 𝑢௖ represents the c-th tw o-dimensional matrix in 𝑈, and the 
subscript 𝑐 represents the channel. 
Squeeze operation is a global average p ooling where the formula is as follows. 
====× c
111() ( , )WH
sq c c
ijzF u u i jWH (2) 
Therefore, Equation (2) converts the input of 𝐻×𝑊×𝐶  into the output of 1×1×𝐶 , 
corresponding to the 𝐹௦௤ operation in Figure 4.  
The next step is the Excitation operation, as shown in Equation (3). The previous squeeze result 
is 𝑧. Here, we multiply 𝑧 by 𝑊ଵ, which is a fully connected layer operation. Then, going through a 
ReLU layer, the output dimension is unchanged. Then, multiply with 𝑊ଶ, and this operation is also 
a fully connected layer process. Finally, go through the sigmoid function to get 𝑠. 
σσ δ == =21(, ) ((, ) ) ( ( ) )exsF z W g z W W W z  (3) 
After getting s, we can operate on the original tensor 𝑈, which is shown in Equation (4). 𝑢௖ is a 
two-dimensional matrix, and 𝑠௖ is a number, which is the weight, so it is equivalent to multiplying 
each value in the 𝑢௖ matrix by 𝑠௖. 
== ⋅ (,)cs c a l e c c c cXFu s s u  (4) 
The spatial attention module is shown in Figure 5. First, the input feature map is still compressed 
using average pooling and max pooling, but th e compression here has become channel-level 
compression, and mean and max operations were performed on the input features in the channel 
dimension. Finally, two two-dimensional features were obtained, and were stitched together 
according to the channel dimensions to obtain a feature map with two channels. Then, a convolution 
operation was performed using a hi dden layer containing a single convolution kernel. The feature is 
consistent with the input feature map in the spatial dimension. 
Figure 4. Diagram of the channel attention module.
TheFtroperation is a standard convolution operation. Strictly speaking, it does not belong to SENet.
The deﬁnition of its input and output is expressed as follows: Ftr:X!U,X2RH0W0C0,U2RHWC
Then this Ftrconvolution operation is shown in Equation (1) where vcrepresents the c-th convolution
kernel and xsrepresents the s-th input.
uc=vcX=C0X
s=1vs
cxs(1)
TheUobtained by Ftris the second three-dimensional matrix on the left in Figure 4, also called
C, feature maps with the size HW.ucrepresents the c-th two-dimensional matrix in U, and the
subscript crepresents the channel.
Squeeze operation is a global average pooling where the formula is as follows.
zc=Fsq(uc) =1
WHWX
i=1HX
j=1uc(i,j) (2)
Therefore, Equation (2) converts the input of HWCinto the output of 11C, corresponding
to the Fsqoperation in Figure 4.
The next step is the Excitation operation, as shown in Equation (3). The previous squeeze result is
z. Here, we multiply zbyW1, which is a fully connected layer operation. Then, going through a ReLU
layer, the output dimension is unchanged. Then, multiply with W2, and this operation is also a fully
connected layer process. Finally, go through the sigmoid function to get s.
s=Fex(z,W) =(g(z,W)) = (W2(W1z)) (3)
After getting s, we can operate on the original tensor U, which is shown in Equation (4). ucis a
two-dimensional matrix, and scis a number, which is the weight, so it is equivalent to multiplying
each value in the ucmatrix by sc.
eXc=Fscale(uc,sc) =scuc (4)
The spatial attention module is shown in Figure 5. First, the input feature map is still compressed
using average pooling and max pooling, but the compression here has become channel-level
compression, and mean and max operations were performed on the input features in the channel
dimension. Finally, two two-dimensional features were obtained, and were stitched together according
to the channel dimensions to obtain a feature map with two channels. Then, a convolution operation Symmetry 2020 ,12, 146 8 of 17
was performed using a hidden layer containing a single convolution kernel. The feature is consistent
with the input feature map in the spatial dimension.
Symmetry 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 18 
  
Figure 5. Diagram of the spatial attention module. 
Define the feature map after max pooling and average pooling operations as 𝐹௔௩௚௦∈ℝଵ×ு×ௐ and 
𝐹௠௔௫௦∈ℝଵ×ு×ௐ. The mathematical processing of this part can be expressed by the following equation: 
σ
σ×
×=
=77
77
max( ) ( ([ ( ); ( )]))
(( [ ;) )s
ss
avgM F f AvgPool F MaxPool F
fF F (5) 
Applying the attention mechanism to both the channel and spatial dimensions simultaneously 
can improve the feature extraction capability of the network model without significantly increasing 
the amount of calculation and parameters. 
3.3. Data Augmentation 
This section introduces data augmentation proces sing, which is a series of image preprocessing 
operations, and operations to alleviat e overfitting of the network training. 
As shown in Figure 6, the face in the picture is first detected using the dlib face image processing 
library, and the facial features are positioned, then  the image is rotated according to the relative 
positions and angles of the eyes, so that the connect ion between the eyes is at a horizontal line. The 
image is then cropped according to the approximat e range of the detected human face. Then, during 
the neural network training process, the output im age is randomly subjected to image augmentation 
operations such as flipping left and right, rotating, scaling, and adding noise according to a certain probability. This can alleviate the over-fitting of the network and enhance the robustness of the 
model. Experiments show that after these operations, the training effect of the network will be better, 
and the age estimation accuracy of the final model will be higher. 
 
Figure 6. Face feature point detection and pose correction. 
  
Figure 5. Diagram of the spatial attention module.
Deﬁne the feature map after max pooling and average pooling operations as Fs
avg2R1HWand
Fs
max2R1HW. The mathematical processing of this part can be expressed by the following equation:
Ms(F) = (f77([AvgPool (F);MaxPool (F)]))
=(f77([Fs
avg;Fs
max))(5)
Applying the attention mechanism to both the channel and spatial dimensions simultaneously
can improve the feature extraction capability of the network model without signiﬁcantly increasing the
amount of calculation and parameters.
3.3. Data Augmentation
This section introduces data augmentation processing, which is a series of image preprocessing
operations, and operations to alleviate overﬁtting of the network training.
As shown in Figure 6, the face in the picture is ﬁrst detected using the dlib face image processing
library, and the facial features are positioned, then the image is rotated according to the relative positions
and angles of the eyes, so that the connection between the eyes is at a horizontal line. The image is
then cropped according to the approximate range of the detected human face. Then, during the neural
network training process, the output image is randomly subjected to image augmentation operations
such as ﬂipping left and right, rotating, scaling, and adding noise according to a certain probability.
This can alleviate the over-ﬁtting of the network and enhance the robustness of the model. Experiments
show that after these operations, the training e ect of the network will be better, and the age estimation
accuracy of the ﬁnal model will be higher.
Symmetry 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 18 
  
Figure 5. Diagram of the spatial attention module. 
Define the feature map after max pooling and average pooling operations as 𝐹௔௩௚௦∈ℝଵ×ு×ௐ and 
𝐹௠௔௫௦∈ℝଵ×ு×ௐ. The mathematical processing of this part can be expressed by the following equation: 
σ
σ×
×=
=77
77
max( ) ( ([ ( ); ( )]))
(( [ ;) )s
ss
avgM F f AvgPool F MaxPool F
fF F (5) 
Applying the attention mechanism to both the channel and spatial dimensions simultaneously 
can improve the feature extraction capability of the network model without significantly increasing 
the amount of calculation and parameters. 
3.3. Data Augmentation 
This section introduces data augmentation proces sing, which is a series of image preprocessing 
operations, and operations to alleviat e overfitting of the network training. 
As shown in Figure 6, the face in the picture is first detected using the dlib face image processing 
library, and the facial features are positioned, then  the image is rotated according to the relative 
positions and angles of the eyes, so that the connect ion between the eyes is at a horizontal line. The 
image is then cropped according to the approximat e range of the detected human face. Then, during 
the neural network training process, the output im age is randomly subjected to image augmentation 
operations such as flipping left and right, rotating, scaling, and adding noise according to a certain probability. This can alleviate the over-fitting of the network and enhance the robustness of the 
model. Experiments show that after these operations, the training effect of the network will be better, 
and the age estimation accuracy of the final model will be higher. 
 
Figure 6. Face feature point detection and pose correction. 
  
Figure 6. Face feature point detection and pose correction. Symmetry 2020 ,12, 146 9 of 17
3.4. Loss Function
As mentioned previously, the convolutional neural network in this article has two fully connected
layers at the end. The penultimate layer contains 101 neurons, representing 101 age categories, that
is, 0–100 years old. Calculating cross-entropy as a classiﬁcation loss, the last layer contains a neuron,
and the absolute deviation of the output of the neuron from the true age label is calculated as the
regression loss. The two losses together constitute the objective function of the method in this paper.
The gradient descent method is used to back-propagate the error and update the weight information
of the neural network until the ﬁnal loss curve converges.
1. Classiﬁcation loss
Softmax is used in the multi-classiﬁcation process. It maps the output of multiple neurons into
the (0, 1) interval, which can be understood as a probability to perform multi-classiﬁcation. For the
penultimate layer of the neural network in this article, there were a total of 101 classiﬁcations, and the
output was recorded as the array V, and Virepresents the i-th element in V, then the Softmax value of
this element is shown in Equation (6).
Vi=ei
P
jej(6)
The predicted age is based on the practice of the literature [ 20] to calculate the expectation after
the Softmax operation, as shown in Equation (7).
E=jK 1jX
i=0yiVi (7)
where Kstands for 101 categories and yi2[0, 101 ), 0i100. In multi-classiﬁcation problems,
the loss function is a cross-entropy loss function. For the sample points (x, y), y is the real label. In a
multi-classiﬁcation problem, its value can only be a set of labels. As shown in Equation (8), yi,kis a
one-hot vector; Krepresents 101 label values and the probability that the i-th sample is predicted to be
thek-th label value is pi,k. There are Nsamples in total.
Lc= 1
NN 1X
i=0K 1X
k=0yi,klogpi,k (8)
2. Regression loss
Regression loss is the absolute deviation of the output of the last layer of neurons from the real
age label. As shown in Equation (9), y1represents the predicted age and yrepresents the true age.
Lr=y1 y (9)
Therefore, the joint loss function of classiﬁcation loss and regression loss is as follows. Lambda is
a hyperparameter used to control the proportion of regression loss in the joint loss function.
L=Lc+Lr (10)
4. Experiments
4.1. Datasets
The face age dataset is the data basis for age estimation. Due to the privacy of age, it is very
dicult to collect face image datasets with real age. Currently, there are many face datasets with age
labels, but most of them are undisclosed. Symmetry 2020 ,12, 146 10 of 17
The MORPH (Craniofacial Longitudinal Morphological Face Database) [ 36] dataset is the largest
face age dataset that has been published. It mainly includes two parts, namely the Album1 and
Album 2 datasets. At present, only the whole Album1 dataset and some of the data of the Album2
dataset are disclosed. The public part of Album2 has a total of more than 55,000 pictures of more
than 13,000 people, and each picture is marked with information such as the age and gender of the
character. This experiment uses this part of the data, called the MORPH2 dataset. Some examples of
the MORPH2 dataset are shown in Figure 7.
Symmetry 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 18 
 The MORPH (Craniofacial Longitudinal Morphologica l Face Database) [36] dataset is the largest 
face age dataset that has been published. It mainly  includes two parts, namely the Album1 and Album 
2 datasets. At present, only the whole Album1 dataset and some of the data of the Album2 dataset are 
disclosed. The public part of Album2 has a total of more than 55,000 pictures of more than 13,000 people, and each picture is marked with information such as the age and gender of the character. This experiment uses this part of th e data, called the MORPH2 dataset. Some examples of the MORPH2 
dataset are shown in Figure 7. 
 
Figure 7. Some examples in the MORPH2 dataset. 
FG-NET (Face and Gesture Recognition Research Network Aging Database) [37] is a popular 
public dataset currently used in face age estimation and aging synthesis research. It contains a total of 
1002 color or grayscale images of 82 people. Since so me images are obtained by scanning old photos, 
there are certain differences in the size, tone, ba ckground, and lighting conditions of the images. 
Some examples of the FG-NET dataset are shown in  Figure 8. There are people of different races 
and colors worldwide. At the same time, there are ma ny studies on facial biometric recognition. Some 
studies have made good progress on age, race, and gender feature recognition. It should be pointed out that the objects studied in this paper were lim ited to the above two datasets. About 77% of the 
images in the MORPH2 dataset are black, about 19% are white, and about 4% are Asian, Indian, etc. 
The small number of the FG-NET dataset and the various features above-mentioned make it more 
suitable for simple testing and comparison with the methods of similar papers. 
 
Figure 8. Some examples in the FG-NET (Face and Ge sture Recognition Research Network Aging 
Database) dataset. 
4.2. Evaluation Metrics 
At present, the mean absolute error (MAE) and cumulative score (CS) are two objective 
evaluation indexes in the research of age estimation. 
1. Mean absolute error (MAE) 
MAE is defined as the average of the absolute de viations of all age estimates and true values. 
2. Cumulative Score (CS) 
Figure 7. Some examples in the MORPH2 dataset.
FG-NET (Face and Gesture Recognition Research Network Aging Database) [ 37] is a popular
public dataset currently used in face age estimation and aging synthesis research. It contains a total of
1002 color or grayscale images of 82 people. Since some images are obtained by scanning old photos,
there are certain di erences in the size, tone, background, and lighting conditions of the images.
Some examples of the FG-NET dataset are shown in Figure 8. There are people of di erent races
and colors worldwide. At the same time, there are many studies on facial biometric recognition.
Some studies have made good progress on age, race, and gender feature recognition. It should be
pointed out that the objects studied in this paper were limited to the above two datasets. About 77% of
the images in the MORPH2 dataset are black, about 19% are white, and about 4% are Asian, Indian, etc.
The small number of the FG-NET dataset and the various features above-mentioned make it more
suitable for simple testing and comparison with the methods of similar papers.
Symmetry 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 18 
 The MORPH (Craniofacial Longitudinal Morphologica l Face Database) [36] dataset is the largest 
face age dataset that has been published. It mainly  includes two parts, namely the Album1 and Album 
2 datasets. At present, only the whole Album1 dataset and some of the data of the Album2 dataset are 
disclosed. The public part of Album2 has a total of more than 55,000 pictures of more than 13,000 people, and each picture is marked with information such as the age and gender of the character. This experiment uses this part of th e data, called the MORPH2 dataset. Some examples of the MORPH2 
dataset are shown in Figure 7. 
 
Figure 7. Some examples in the MORPH2 dataset. 
FG-NET (Face and Gesture Recognition Research Network Aging Database) [37] is a popular 
public dataset currently used in face age estimation and aging synthesis research. It contains a total of 
1002 color or grayscale images of 82 people. Since so me images are obtained by scanning old photos, 
there are certain differences in the size, tone, ba ckground, and lighting conditions of the images. 
Some examples of the FG-NET dataset are shown in  Figure 8. There are people of different races 
and colors worldwide. At the same time, there are ma ny studies on facial biometric recognition. Some 
studies have made good progress on age, race, and gender feature recognition. It should be pointed out that the objects studied in this paper were lim ited to the above two datasets. About 77% of the 
images in the MORPH2 dataset are black, about 19% are white, and about 4% are Asian, Indian, etc. 
The small number of the FG-NET dataset and the various features above-mentioned make it more 
suitable for simple testing and comparison with the methods of similar papers. 
 
Figure 8. Some examples in the FG-NET (Face and Ge sture Recognition Research Network Aging 
Database) dataset. 
4.2. Evaluation Metrics 
At present, the mean absolute error (MAE) and cumulative score (CS) are two objective 
evaluation indexes in the research of age estimation. 
1. Mean absolute error (MAE) 
MAE is defined as the average of the absolute de viations of all age estimates and true values. 
2. Cumulative Score (CS) 
Figure 8. Some examples in the FG-NET (Face and Gesture Recognition Research Network Aging
Database) dataset.
4.2. Evaluation Metrics
At present, the mean absolute error (MAE) and cumulative score (CS) are two objective evaluation
indexes in the research of age estimation.
1. Mean absolute error (MAE)
MAE is deﬁned as the average of the absolute deviations of all age estimates and true values.
2. Cumulative Score (CS)
CS represents the ratio of the number of samples whose absolute error value between the
estimated value and the true value is less than the speciﬁed threshold to the total number of test
samples. The speciﬁc expression is: Symmetry 2020 ,12, 146 11 of 17
CS(e)=1
NNX
i=11nyi y0
ieo
(11)
Among them, 1nyi y0
ieo
means that when the absolute error between the estimated value y0
i
and the real value yiis less than or equal to the eyears, the value is 1, otherwise it is 0, which is the
total number of test samples. The size of the CS value is related to the selection of the threshold value e.
Under the condition of a ﬁxed threshold value, the larger the CS value, the more samples in a speciﬁc
error range, the better the age estimation e ect.
4.3. Parameter Setting
Our experimental platform was as follows. Operating System (OS): Ubuntu 16.06; Graphics
Processing Unit (GPU): Quadro P6000; Memory: 24 GB. The deep learning framework uses PyTorch.
PyTorch was developed by the Torch7 team. As its name indicates, PyTorch di ers from Torch in that
PyTorch uses Python as the development language. It is a Python-ﬁrst deep learning framework that
can not only achieve powerful GPU acceleration, but also support dynamic neural networks. This is
not supported by many mainstream frameworks such as Tensorﬂow. PyTorch can be seen as a numpy
with GPU support, but also as a powerful deep neural network with automatic di erentiation.
The input of the network is a 224 224 pixels RGB (Red, Green, Blue) face image. The network
training optimizer uses the Adam optimizer ( 1=0.9,2=0.999 ), and its learning rate is 0.001.
Step attenuation is used, and every 20 epochs, the learning rate is attenuated by a 0.2 attenuation
rate. The batch size is 128, and a total of 80 epoch networks can be trained to converge. In the later
experiments, the weight of the regression loss is 0.1. In subsequent experiments, the learning rate,
attenuation coe cient, batch size, and number of training rounds are all the same. Whether to add the
regression loss and whether to perform the image augmentation operation depends on the speciﬁc
experimental settings.
4.4. Multiple Sets of Experiments
4.4.1. Experiment on MORPH2
The ratio of the MORPH2 training dataset, validation dataset, and test dataset is 7:2:1. A total
of four groups of experiments were performed: the training dataset was divided into two types
of MORPH2 and MORPH2_ALIGN, according to whether or not face alignment was performed.
At the end of the network, the classiﬁcation layer and the regression layer are used. Therefore,
the network structure is divided into two types, according to whether the mixed attention mechanism
is used: SFV2_l1 and MA_SFV2_l1. Then, the loss function curves and MAE curves of the four sets
of experimental results are shown in Figure 9. Each training is performed for 80 epoch, and if face
alignment is not performed, it takes about 116 min, otherwise it takes about 138 min.
In addition, we conducted experiments to explain the important role of image augmentation
in mitigating overﬁtting. As shown in Figure 10, if there is no image augmentation, the network is
severely overﬁtting.
It can be seen that after image augmentation, with the use of the mixed attention mechanism
and the combined use of classiﬁcation and regression loss, the ﬁnal MAE value was relatively low,
indicating that the method proposed in this paper contributes to the improvement of the accuracy of
age estimation. As the LOSS curves and MAE curves of the experiments in each group are tested on
the validation set that accounts for 20% of the total dataset, the ﬁnal MAE needs to be tested on the test
set that accounts for 10% of the total dataset using the trained model to represent the performance of
the current model. We ﬁnally collected the results of a total of 33 experiments and plotted them using
box and whisker plots. The results are shown in Figure 11. Symmetry 2020 ,12, 146 12 of 17
Symmetry 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 18 
  
Figure 9. LOSS curves and MAE (Mean Absolute Error) cu rves of the four groups of experiments. 
In addition, we conducted experiments to explain the important role of image augmentation in 
mitigating overfitting. As shown in Figure 10, if  there is no image augmentation, the network is 
severely overfitting. 
 
Figure 10. Final LOSS and MAE (Mean Absolute Error) curves without pre-processing data using 
image augmentation. 
It can be seen that after image augmentation, with the use of the mixed attention mechanism 
and the combined use of classification and regressi on loss, the final MAE value was relatively low, 
indicating that the method proposed in this paper contributes to the improvement of the accuracy of 
age estimation. As the LOSS curves and MAE curves of the experiments in each group are tested on 
the validation set that accounts for 20% of the total dataset, the final MAE needs to be tested on the test set that accounts for 10% of the total dataset using the trained model to represent the performance 
of the current model. We finally collected the resu lts of a total of 33 experiments and plotted them 
using box and whisker plots. The results are shown in Figure 11. 
Figure 9. LOSS curves and MAE (Mean Absolute Error) curves of the four groups of experiments.
Symmetry 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 18 
  
Figure 9. LOSS curves and MAE (Mean Absolute Error) cu rves of the four groups of experiments. 
In addition, we conducted experiments to explain the important role of image augmentation in 
mitigating overfitting. As shown in Figure 10, if  there is no image augmentation, the network is 
severely overfitting. 
 
Figure 10. Final LOSS and MAE (Mean Absolute Error) curves without pre-processing data using 
image augmentation. 
It can be seen that after image augmentation, with the use of the mixed attention mechanism 
and the combined use of classification and regressi on loss, the final MAE value was relatively low, 
indicating that the method proposed in this paper contributes to the improvement of the accuracy of 
age estimation. As the LOSS curves and MAE curves of the experiments in each group are tested on 
the validation set that accounts for 20% of the total dataset, the final MAE needs to be tested on the test set that accounts for 10% of the total dataset using the trained model to represent the performance 
of the current model. We finally collected the resu lts of a total of 33 experiments and plotted them 
using box and whisker plots. The results are shown in Figure 11. 
Figure 10. Final LOSS ( a) and MAE ( b) (Mean Absolute Error) curves without pre-processing data
using image augmentation.
Symmetry 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 18 
   
Figure 11. MAE results plotted by box and whiske r plots of four group experiments. 
There were 33 experiments in total, and each expe riment had four groups of experiments, namely 
SFV2_l1, MA_SFV2_l1, ALIGN_FV2_l1, and ALIGN_MA _SFV2_l1. The final mean and variance of MAE 
were 2.91 (0.020), 2.88 (0.027), 2.72 (0.018), and 2.68 (0.030)  respectively. We can see that the variance of the 
MAE value was small, and that the change will not be very large, which fully shows that the 
improved method proposed in this paper improves the accuracy of age estimation. 
4.4.2. Experiment on FG-NET (Face and Gesture Recognition Research Network Aging Database) 
Since multiple sets of comparative experiment s were performed on the MORPH2 dataset, the 
network model we used on the FG-NET dataset wa s MA-SFV2_l1. In addition, the FG-NET dataset 
was divided into two sets of comparative experime nts based on whether or not image augmentation 
operations were performed. However, the capacity of the FG-NET dataset is not large, so according 
to previous practice, the method of leaving one pers on was adopted, that is, each specific experiment 
in each group of experiments uses all age pictures of  one person as the test set, and all other pictures 
as the training set. Since FG-NET has a total of 82 individual pictures, a total of 82 experiments were performed, and the average value of each experime nt was finally used as the final performance index. 
We undertook 33 experiments, and the final mean and variance of MAE were 4.12 (0.025) and 3.81 
(0.031) respectively. 
4.5. Quantitative Comparison with Other Methods 4.5.1. Compari son on MORPH2 
Table 2 shows the MAE values of the classic or la test age estimation methods such as DEX (Deep 
EXpectation), OHRank (Ordinal Hyperplanes Ranker ), AD (Age Difference), AGEn (AGE group-n 
encoding), and C3AE (Compact yet efficient Cascade Context-based Age Estimation model) on the MORPH2 dataset. As can be seen from the comparison in the table, the age estimation method proposed in this paper had a good effect on the MORPH2 data set, and achieved better re sults than the traditional 
age estimation methods, an d excellent results based on deep learni ng models such as DEX, GA-DFL, and 
C3AE. In particular, even though methods such as DEX (IMDB-WIKI) and C3AE (IMDB-WIKI) use a large 
amount of additional training data during the training process, that is, pre-training on the IMDB-WIKI 
dataset first, these methods are not as effective as  our method, which trains the network from scratch 
Figure 11. MAE results plotted by box and whisker plots of four group experiments.
There were 33 experiments in total, and each experiment had four groups of experiments, namely
SFV2_l1, MA_SFV2_l1, ALIGN_FV2_l1, and ALIGN_MA_SFV2_l1. The ﬁnal mean and variance of
MAE were 2.91 (0.020), 2.88 (0.027), 2.72 (0.018), and 2.68 (0.030) respectively. We can see that the Symmetry 2020 ,12, 146 13 of 17
variance of the MAE value was small, and that the change will not be very large, which fully shows
that the improved method proposed in this paper improves the accuracy of age estimation.
4.4.2. Experiment on FG-NET (Face and Gesture Recognition Research Network Aging Database)
Since multiple sets of comparative experiments were performed on the MORPH2 dataset,
the network model we used on the FG-NET dataset was MA-SFV2_l1. In addition, the FG-NET dataset
was divided into two sets of comparative experiments based on whether or not image augmentation
operations were performed. However, the capacity of the FG-NET dataset is not large, so according to
previous practice, the method of leaving one person was adopted, that is, each speciﬁc experiment in
each group of experiments uses all age pictures of one person as the test set, and all other pictures as
the training set. Since FG-NET has a total of 82 individual pictures, a total of 82 experiments were
performed, and the average value of each experiment was ﬁnally used as the ﬁnal performance index.
We undertook 33 experiments, and the ﬁnal mean and variance of MAE were 4.12 (0.025) and 3.81
(0.031) respectively.
4.5. Quantitative Comparison with Other Methods
4.5.1. Comparison on MORPH2
Table 2 shows the MAE values of the classic or latest age estimation methods such as DEX (Deep
EXpectation), OHRank (Ordinal Hyperplanes Ranker), AD (Age Di erence), AGEn (AGE group-n
encoding), and C3AE (Compact yet e cient Cascade Context-based Age Estimation model) on the
MORPH2 dataset. As can be seen from the comparison in the table, the age estimation method
proposed in this paper had a good e ect on the MORPH2 dataset, and achieved better results than
the traditional age estimation methods, and excellent results based on deep learning models such
as DEX, GA-DFL, and C3AE. In particular, even though methods such as DEX (IMDB-WIKI) and
C3AE (IMDB-WIKI) use a large amount of additional training data during the training process, that
is, pre-training on the IMDB-WIKI dataset ﬁrst, these methods are not as e ective as our method,
which trains the network from scratch directly, which also fully proves that our system has strong
competitiveness. In addition, the network model of methods such as AGEn is very large, training
is time-consuming and takes up a lot of storage space, and in comparison, our lightweight network
model has a short training time, takes up a small amount of space, and is convenient for deployment
on mobile terminals.
Table 2. Comparison of MAE (Mean Absolute Error) on MORPH2 (Craniofacial Longitudinal
Morphological Face Database).
Methods MAE
AGES [11] 8.83
OR-CNN [19] 3.27
DEX [32] 3.25
DEX (IMDB-WIKI) 2.68
OHRank [33] 6.07
CS-LR [38] 4.59
Sparsity [39] 3.45
GA-DFL [40] 3.37
AD [41] 2.78
AGEn [42] 2.93
AGEn (IMDB-WIKI) 2.52
ARN [43] 3.00
ODFL-ODL [44] 3.12
C3AE [45] 2.78
C3AE (IMDB-WIKI) 2.75
MA-SFV2 2.68 Symmetry 2020 ,12, 146 14 of 17
According to the calculation method of the cumulative score (CS), the CS values under di erent
error thresholds are calculated on the MORPH2 dataset, and the corresponding CS curves are plotted
in Figure 12.
Symmetry 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 18 
 directly, which also fully proves that our system has strong competitiveness. In addition, the network 
model of methods such as AGEn is very large, training is time-consuming and takes up a lot of storage 
space, and in comparison, our light weight network model has a short training time, takes up a small 
amount of space, and is convenient for deployment on mobile terminals. 
Table 2. Comparison of MAE (Mean Absolute Error) on MORPH2 (Craniofacial Longitudinal 
Morphological Face Database). 
Methods MAE 
AGES [11] 8.83 
OR-CNN [19] 3.27 
DEX [32] 3.25 
DEX (IMDB-WIKI) 2.68 
OHRank [33] 6.07 
CS-LR [38] 4.59 
Sparsity [39] 3.45 
GA-DFL [40] 3.37 
AD [41] 2.78 
AGEn [42] 2.93  
AGEn (IMDB-WIKI) 2.52 
ARN [43] 3.00 
ODFL-ODL [44] 3.12 
C3AE [45] 2.78 
C3AE (IMDB-WIKI) 2.75 
MA-SFV2 2.68 
According to the calculation method of the cumulative score (CS), the CS values under different 
error thresholds are calculated on the MORPH2 data set, and the corresponding  CS curves are plotted 
in Figure 12. 
 
Figure 12. CS (Cumulative Score) curve on MORPH2. 
As can be seen from the figure, with the increase of the allowable error, the CS curve in this paper 
showed a steady growth, and the value of the CS cu rve in this paper was higher from the beginning, 
which is obviously better than other methods. 
4.5.2. Compari son on FG-NET 
Table 3 shows the MAE values of the classic or latest age estimation methods such as DEX, 
OHRank, and C3AE on the FG-NET dataset. 0102030405060708090100
0123456789 1 0CS(%)
Error LevelOR-CNN
CS-LR
GA-DFL
AGEn
ODL
MA-SFV2
Figure 12. CS (Cumulative Score) curve on MORPH2.
As can be seen from the ﬁgure, with the increase of the allowable error, the CS curve in this paper
showed a steady growth, and the value of the CS curve in this paper was higher from the beginning,
which is obviously better than other methods.
4.5.2. Comparison on FG-NET
Table 3 shows the MAE values of the classic or latest age estimation methods such as DEX,
OHRank, and C3AE on the FG-NET dataset.
Table 3. Comparison of MAE on FG-NET.
Methods MAE
AGES [11] 6.77
Ranking-CNN [20] 4.13
LARR [30] 5.07
DEX [32] 4.63
DEX (IMDB-WIKI) 3.09
OHRank [33] 4.48
Sparsity [39] 4.25
GA-DFL [40] 4.16
C3AE [45] 4.09
C3AE (IMDB-WIKI) 2.95
CS-LBFL [46] 4.36
DRFs [47] 3.85
CA-SVR [48] 4.67
MA-SFV2 3.81
It can be seen from the comparison that the MAE value of the method (MA-SFV2) on the FG-NET
dataset was 3.79, and the results were signiﬁcantly better than the age estimation methods based on
hand-designed features such as OHRank and CS-LBFL in the table, and also better than the deep
learning-based age estimation models such as DEX, Ranking-CNN, and C3AE. However, the age
estimation results of DEX (IMDB-WIKI) and C3AE (IMDB-WIKI) were better than MA-SFV2. The DEX
(IMDB-WIKI) model and C3AE (IMDB-WIKI) were pre-trained on the IMDB-WIKI dataset during
the construction process, and then ﬁne-tuned on the FG-NET dataset, using a large number of extra
training data. Symmetry 2020 ,12, 146 15 of 17
5. Conclusions
This paper was based on a lightweight convolutional neural network, combining image
augmentation, mixed attention mechanism, and age estimation algorithms combined with classiﬁcation
and regression. Under the premise of ensuring that the training time is reasonable and the network
parameters are appropriate, there is no need to pass IMDB-WIKI pre-training of large face databases
that can achieve higher age estimation accuracy than the current state-of-the-art. However, it is still not
lightweight enough to deploy the model in this article to a mobile terminal, so the research direction
in the future is to continue to explore how to use a more compact model to achieve the desired age
estimation e ect.
Author Contributions: In this work, X.L. conceived the face image age estimation method based on lightweight
CNN and designed the experiments; Y.Z. proposed the MA-SFV2 network and optimized the experimental details.
Y.Z. and H.K. performed the experiments and analyzed the data; Y.Z. drafted the manuscript; X.L., H.K., and X.M.
edited the manuscript. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: The work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 61772088
and 61502361).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest.
References
1. Klare, B.F.; Klein, B.; Taborsky, E.; Blanton, A.; Cheney, J.; Allen, K.; Grother, P .; Mah, A.; Jain, A.K. Pushing
the frontiers of unconstrained face detection and recognition: Iarpa janus benchmark a. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Boston, MA, USA, 7–12 June 2015;
pp. 1931–1939.
2. Zhao, W.; Chellappa, R.; Phillips, P .J.; Rosenfeld, A. Face recognition: A literature survey. ACM Comput.
Surv. CSUR 2003 ,35, 399–458. [CrossRef]
3. Chen, J.-C.; Patel, V .M.; Chellappa, R. Unconstrained face veriﬁcation using deep cnn features. In Proceedings
of the 2016 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), Lake Placid, NY, USA,
7–10 March 2016; pp. 1–9.
4. Cao, C.; Hou, Q.; Zhou, K. Displaced dynamic expression regression for real-time facial tracking and
animation. ACM Trans. Graph. TOG 2014 ,33, 43. [CrossRef]
5. Vezzetti, E.; Tornincasa, S.; Moos, S.; Marcolin, F. 3D Human Face Analysis: Automatic Expression Recognition.
Biomed. Eng. 2016 . [CrossRef]
6. Vezzetti, E.; Marcolin, F. 3D Landmarking in multiexpression face analysis: A preliminary study on eyebrows
and mouth. Aesthet. Plast. Surg. 2014 ,38, 796–811. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. Guo, G.; Mu, G. A framework for joint estimation of age, gender and ethnicity on a large database.
Image Vis. Comput. 2014 ,32, 761–770. [CrossRef]
8. Ramanathan, N.; Chellappa, R. Modeling shape and textural variations in aging faces. In Proceedings
of the 2008 8th IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture Recognition, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands, 17–19 September 2008; pp. 1–8.
9. Yun, F.; Guodong, G.; Huang, T.S. Age synthesis and estimation via faces: A survey. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell. 2010 ,32, 1955–1976. [CrossRef]
10. Suo, J.; Zhu, S.-C.; Shan, S.; Chen, X. A compositional and dynamic model for face aging. IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell. 2009 ,32, 385–401.
11. Geng, X.; Zhou, Z.-H.; Smith-Miles, K. Automatic Age Estimation Based on Facial Aging Patterns. IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2008 ,30, 368. [CrossRef]
12. Kwon, Y.H.; da Vitoria Lobo, N. Age Classiﬁcation from Facial Images. Comput. Vis. Image Underst. 1999 ,74,
1–21. [CrossRef]
13. Lanitis, A.; Taylor, C.J.; Cootes, T.F. Toward automatic simulation of aging e ects on face images. IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2002 ,24, 442–455. [CrossRef]
14. Guo, G.; Fu, Y.; Dyer, C.R.; Huang, T.S. Image-based human age estimation by manifold learning and locally
adjusted robust regression. IEEE Trans. Image Process. 2008 ,17, 1178–1188. Symmetry 2020 ,12, 146 16 of 17
15. Gunay, A.; Nabiyev, V .V . Automatic age classiﬁcation with LBP . In Proceedings of the 2008 23rd International
Symposium on Computer and Information Sciences, Istanbul, Turkey, 27–29 October 2008.
16. Guo, G.; Mu, G.; Fu, Y.; Huang, T.S. Human age estimation using bio-inspired features. In Proceedings of
the 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Miami, FL, USA, 20–25 June 2009;
pp. 112–119.
17. Dong, Y.; Zhen, L.; Li, S.Z. Age Estimation by Multi-scale Convolutional Network. In Asian Conference on
Computer Vision ; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2014.
18. Wang, X.; Guo, R.; Kambhamettu, C. Deeply-Learned Feature for Age Estimation. In Proceedings of the
2015 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, Waikoloa, HI, USA, 6–9 January 2015;
pp. 534–541.
19. Niu, Z.; Zhou, M.; Wang, L.; Gao, X.; Hua, G. Ordinal Regression with Multiple Output CNN for Age
Estimation. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), Las Vegas, NV , USA, 26 June–1 July 2016; pp. 4920–4928.
20. Chen, S.; Zhang, C.; Dong, M. Deep Age Estimation: From Classiﬁcation to Ranking. IEEE Trans. Multimed.
2017 ,20, 2209–2222. [CrossRef]
21. Liu, H.; Lu, J.; Feng, J.; Zhou, J. Ordinal deep feature learning for facial age estimation. In Proceedings of the
2017 12th IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture Recognition (FG 2017), Washington,
DC, USA, 30 May–3 June 2017; pp. 157–164.
22. Gao, B.B.; Xing, C.; Xie, C.W.; Wu, J.; Geng, X. Deep Label Distribution Learning with Label Ambiguity.
IEEE Trans. Image Process. 2017 ,26, 2825–2838. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. Kang, J.; Kim, C.; Lee, Y.; Cho, S.; Park, K. Age Estimation Robust to Optical and Motion Blurring by Deep
Residual CNN. Symmetry 2018 ,10, 108. [CrossRef]
24. Jeong, Y.; Lee, S.; Park, D.; Park, K. Accurate Age Estimation Using Multi-Task Siamese Network-Based Deep
Metric Learning for Front Face Images. Symmetry 2018 ,10, 385. [CrossRef]
25. Sandler, M.; Howard, A.; Zhu, M.; Zhmoginov, A.; Chen, L.-C. Mobilenetv2: Inverted residuals and
linear bottlenecks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
Salt Lake City, UT, USA, 18–22 June 2018; pp. 4510–4520.
26. Ma, N.; Zhang, X.; Zheng, H.-T.; Sun, J. Shu enet v2: Practical guidelines for e cient cnn architecture
design. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), Munich, Germany,
8–14 September 2018; pp. 116–131.
27. Yang, T.-Y.; Huang, Y.-H.; Lin, Y.-Y.; Hsiu, P .-C.; Chuang, Y.-Y. SSR-Net: A Compact Soft Stagewise Regression
Network for Age Estimation. IJCAI 2018 ,5, 7.
28. King, D.E. Dlib-ml: A Machine Learning Toolkit. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 2009 ,10, 1755–1758.
29. Hu, L.; Li, Z.; Liu, H. Age Group Estimation on Single Face Image Using Blocking ULBP and SVM.
InProceedings of the 2015 Chinese Intelligent Automation Conference ; Springer: Berlin /Heidelberg, Germany,
2015; pp. 431–438.
30. Guo, G.; Yun, F.; Huang, T.S.; Dyer, C.R. Locally Adjusted Robust Regression for Human Age Estimation.
In Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE Workshop on Applications of Computer Vision, Copper Mountain, CO,
USA, 7–9 January 2008.
31. Chao, W.-L.; Liu, J.-Z.; Ding, J.-J. Facial age estimation based on label-sensitive learning and age-oriented
regression. Pattern Recognit. 2013 ,46, 628–641. [CrossRef]
32. Rothe, R.; Timofte, R.; Van Gool, L. Deep Expectation of Real and Apparent Age from a Single Image without
Facial Landmarks. Int. J. Comput. Vis. 2016 ,126, 144–157. [CrossRef]
33. Chang, K.Y.; Chen, C.S.; Hung, Y.P . Ordinal hyperplanes ranker with cost sensitivities for age estimation.
In Proceedings of the CVPR 2011, Colorado Springs, CO, USA, 20–25 June 2011.
34. Hu, J.; Shen, L.; Sun, G. Squeeze-and-excitation networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, 18–22 June 2018; pp. 7132–7141.
35. Woo, S.; Park, J.; Lee, J.-Y.; So Kweon, I. Cbam: Convolutional block attention module. In Proceedings of the
European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), Munich, Germany, 8–14 September 2018; pp. 3–19.
36. Ricanek, K.; Tesafaye, T. Morph: A longitudinal image database of normal adult age-progression.
In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition, New York,
NY, USA, 10–12 April 2006; pp. 341–345. Symmetry 2020 ,12, 146 17 of 17
37. Panis, G.; Lanitis, A. An Overview of Research Activities in Facial Age Estimation Using the FG-NET
Aging Database. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision, Zurich, Switzerland,
6–12 September 2014.
38. Feng, S.; Lang, C.; Feng, J.; Wang, T.; Luo, J. Human Facial Age Estimation by Cost-Sensitive Label Ranking
and Trace Norm Regularization. IEEE Trans. Multimed. 2016 ,19, 136–148. [CrossRef]
39. Dong, Y.; Lang, C.; Feng, S. General structured sparse learning for human facial age estimation. Multimed. Syst.
2017 ,25, 49–57. [CrossRef]
40. Liu, H.; Lu, J.; Feng, J.; Zhou, J. Group-aware deep feature learning for facial age estimation. Pattern Recognit.
2016 ,66, 82–94. [CrossRef]
41. Hu, Z.; Wen, Y.; Wang, J.; Wang, M.; Hong, R.; Yan, S. Facial Age Estimation with Age Di erence. IEEE Trans.
Image Process. 2017 ,26, 3087–3097. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Tan, Z.; Wan, J.; Lei, Z.; Zhi, R.; Guo, G.; Li, S.Z. E cient Group-n Encoding and Decoding for Facial Age
Estimation. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2018 ,40, 2610–2623. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. Agustsson, E.; Timofte, R.; Van Gool, L. Anchored regression networks applied to age estimation and
super resolution. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, Venice, Italy,
22–29 October 2017; pp. 1643–1652.
44. Liu, H.; Lu, J.; Feng, J.; Zhou, J. Ordinal Deep Learning for Facial Age Estimation. IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.
Video Technol. 2019 ,29, 486–501. [CrossRef]
45. Zhang, C.; Liu, S.; Xu, X.; Zhu, C. C3AE: Exploring the Limits of Compact Model for Age Estimation.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Long Beach, CA, USA,
16–20 June 2019; pp. 12587–12596.
46. Lu, J.; Liong, V .E.; Zhou, J. Cost-Sensitive Local Binary Feature Learning for Facial Age Estimation. IEEE Trans.
Image Process. 2015 ,24, 5356–5368. [CrossRef]
47. Shen, W.; Guo, Y.; Wang, Y.; Zhao, K.; Wang, B.; Yuille, A.L. Deep regression forests for age estimation.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Salt Lake City, UT,
USA, 18–22 June 2018; pp. 2304–2313.
48. Chen, K.; Gong, S.; Xiang, T.; Loy, C.C. Cumulative Attribute Space for Age and Crowd Density Estimation.
In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Portland, UT,
USA, 23–28 June 2013; pp. 2467–2474.
©2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).